Why I quit Atom and went back to Sublime
2018/01/13

## Google Chrome

Chrome. I love Chrome. Aside from missing very few features, and covering the spec,
it has great developer tools.

It is also relatively quick on Windows, Mac, Linux, and (surprise!) Chrome OS.

Yay for Chrome! But all that speedy goodness comes with a cost.

## Slack

<iframe
  border="0"
  frameborder="0"
  style="max-width:500px;width:100%;margin:16px -4px 0;display:block;height:324px"
  src="https://twitframe.com/show?url=https://twitter.com/iamdevloper/status/926458505355235328"
></iframe>

When I read this first time I had a chuckle to myself - but it's really not that funny.

You genuinely use *one million times* your computer's memory to message someone
sitting on the desk opposite than was needed to send humans to the moon and back.

And Chrome, and Electron, are responsible.

## Electron

If you didn't know, Slack runs on Electron, which is a glorified Chrome
window. As Chrome runs on every desktop OS, Slack can be written once to
work on Windows, Mac and Linux.

Which is great for their development team as they can focus on a consistent UI
and feature set across operating systems, but it is ultimately the primary
cause of such a high RAM, and the slow startup times.

Either a high use of RAM or a slow startup time could be forgiven
individually. If it started quickly, you could just start it each time
you need it so you don't tie up memory in the meantime.

The random delays while it tries to find some memory, and the startup time
are frankly, really annoying.

## Atom uses Electron

Atom also uses Electron. It is part of why it has grown so fast:

- Electron allows any user to inspect the internals of Atom using the Chrome DevTools.
- As it runs in a window, you can write your own cross-platform Atom plugins using
  just HTML, CSS and JS.
- The Atom core developers don't need to worry about cross-platform either, and
  that saves them a lot of time.

But running a web browser in the background is, surely, overkill. Not just that,
but an infamously RAM hungry web browser.

It's not just Atom and Slack either. The following common developer tools use Electron:

- Atom
- Visual Studio Code
- Hyper (Terminal)
- Postman (for HTTP requests)

And many more. All are really nice, well-built apps, but eat up so much RAM.

## Atom is really slow at the most basic things

The following numbers are from [jhallen's Github](https://github.com/jhallen/joes-sandbox/tree/master/editor-perf).

***Disclaimer:* these results are from August 2016. Things might have changed.**

### File 1:

`hello.c`

```
#include <stdio.h>

int main()
{
    printf("Hello, world!\n");
}
```

Editor    | RAM used (kB) 
:--------:|------------:
vim       | `5,336`
emacs -nw | `17,060`
*sublime* | `45,800`
*atom*    | `250,404`
*vscode*  | `339,512`

### File 2:

`test.xml` (5.8MB XML File)

Editor    | RAM used (kB)       | RAM used (no highlighting) (kB)  
:--------:|--------------------:|------:
vim       | `11,952`              | `11,824`
emacs -nw | `23,216`              | `21,320`
*sublime* | `64,608`              | `63,800`
*vscode*  | `391,496`             | `383,440`
*atom*    | n/a<super>*</super> | `825,232`

Editor    | Highlight test time
:--------:|------:
*sublime* | `5s`
emacs -nw | `8s`
vim       | `10s`
*vscode*  | `28s`
*atom*    | `1m 22s`

Editor    | Find and replace time
:--------:|------:
vim       | `4.6s`
*sublime* | `6s`
emacs -nw | `9.7s`
*vscode*  | `1m 12s`
*atom*    | `over 10m`

<super>*</super>Atom has to be tricked into highlighting large files.
For one reason or another, they didn't do that to check how much it was using.

Check out the link for a full rundown of all the tests.

## Not only is Atom slow, but Sublime is quick

Perhaps the most impressive test of all was the open a 3GB file test.

Not even command line editors `emacs`, `vim` or even `nano` could open it, yet
Sublime managed it in a reasonable 75 seconds, and even has a cute progress bar.

## I bought it and I don't regret it yet

$80. It turns out, if you're a professional, it's actually worth it.

Yes, you get rid of the annoying "Please buy me" popup. But the biggest thing you get
by far is the newest dev builds. They just added programming ligatures 😍. And as a
patron, you can suggest things for them to work on.

Sublime Text has changed a lot since the first time I used it, 5 years ago,
in the Computer Science labs at university, but one thing that hasn't changed too much
if the default UI.

To that end, I recommend the beautiful and well-designed "Monokai Pro" theme and scheme,
check it out [here](https://www.monokai.pro/).

## Sublime is still quite annoying

- You can't do basic file renaming, deleting, moving without the extension
  [SideBarEnhancements](https://github.com/SideBarEnhancements-org/SideBarEnhancements)
- There's no way to get the yellow filenames for files with git diffs, or green for new
  files; one of the most useful things in Atom
- If you don't like something, you can't just hack away at it like you can in Atom

But most of the things that surprised me were good. Find and replace regex refactors have
become a more frequent part of my developer flow, and I was surprised how many new features
have been released in the short time I've had it.

That is, until [xi-editor](https://github.com/google/xi-editor) comes along and blows all
of our minds.
